Add design documentation (#562)
oddsdk/ts-odd: DESIGN.md

# ODD

## Introduction

The ODD SDK is a local-first toolkit that helps developers build systems that store data in a secure, reliable, and decentralised way. The focus is on the user, providing them with sufficient authority while still being convenient.

> ODD stands for Open Distributed Data. We want our data accessible from anywhere and distributed, meaning that it can live partially or fully in multiple places. Ideally as much as possible of this data lives on the devices of the owner of the data and communication of this data would be done in a decentralised peer-to-peer fashion.

Reviewer: Small suggestion, I find this reads a bit easier 
```suggestion
ODD stands for Open Distributed Data. We want our data accessible from anywhere and distributed, meaning it can live partially or fully in multiple places. Ideally, as much of this data as possible lives on user owned devices and communication of this data will be done in a decentralised, peer-to-peer fashion.
```

> We also prefer not to rely on centralised services when providing users and devices with the needed authority. When a user starts using a new device, their existing device should be authorise the new one without any intervention from a central service. This can be done by giving the new device one or more tickets that can be verified on the spot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also prefer not to rely on centralised services when providing users and devices with the needed authority. When a user starts using a new device, their existing device should authorise the new one without any intervention from a central service. This can be done by giving the new device one or more tickets that can be verified on the spot.
```

> Rather than putting everything in a closed system, ODD puts everything out in the open. That means encryption is used to keep data private. These encryption keys and authorisation tickets give us a chance to escape from passwords, so preferably passwords are avoided.

Reviewer: Small suggestion, maybe a little more concise

```suggestion
Rather than putting everything in a closed system, ODD puts everything out in the open. This means encryption is used to keep data private. Additionally, these encryption keys and authorisation tickets enable us to escape from passwords.
```

> The ODD SDK relies on open protocols, this includes the [WNFS protocol](https://github.com/wnfs-wg) for the data management, and [UCAN](https://github.com/ucan-wg) to provide users and devices with the necessary authorisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ODD SDK relies on open protocols, these include the [WNFS protocol](https://github.com/wnfs-wg) for data management, and [UCAN](https://github.com/ucan-wg) to provide users and devices with the necessary authorisation.
```

## Implementation

> ts-odd is written in Typescript, a Javascript dialect. The resulting code should be usable in any modern Javascript environment that supports the [Web Crypto API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Crypto_API) and [Web Assembly](https://webassembly.org/). It uses the Rust implementations of [WNFS](https://github.com/wnfs-wg/rs-wnfs) and [UCAN](https://github.com/ucan-wg/rs-ucan) which compile to Web Assembly.

Reviewer: Small tweak: `which` must proceeded by a comma in this context. Alternatively, it could be switched out for `that` with no comma before it
```suggestion
ts-odd is written in Typescript, a Javascript dialect. The resulting code should be usable in any modern Javascript environment that supports the [Web Crypto API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Crypto_API) and [Web Assembly](https://webassembly.org/). It uses the Rust implementations of [WNFS](https://github.com/wnfs-wg/rs-wnfs) and [UCAN](https://github.com/ucan-wg/rs-ucan), which compile to Web Assembly.
```

> Various other pieces are layered on top of these core protocols and assumptions, these are called "components" in ts-odd. These allow us to adapt to various technologies and environments. We'll start with the components that are closest to the data and go from there. These are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various other pieces are layered on top of these core protocols and assumptions, these are called "components" in ts-odd. These allow us to adapt to various technologies and environments. We'll start with the components closest to the data and go from there. These are:
```

1. Depot
2. Account
3. Identifier & Agent
4. Authority
5. Channel
6. DNS
7. Storage
8. Manners

The following graph shows a rough overview how the components relate:

```mermaid
flowchart LR;
    Identifier --> Account --> Agent --> AS(((Account service))):::service

    FS[(File System)]:::subject --> Depot
    FS[(File System)]:::subject --> Manners
    FS[(File System)]:::subject --> DNS

    Authority --> Channel

    Storage --> Authority
    Depot <--> Storage
    Account <--> Storage
    Agent --> Storage

    classDef component fill:#e3d2c4,stroke:#caaa90
    classDef service fill:#e7d0ea,stroke:#cc9bd2
    classDef subject fill:#f3dee0,stroke:#dfa6ab

    class Account,Agent,Authority,Channel,Depot,DNS,Identifier,Manners,Storage component
```

> These are only some of the relationships, but it should you a rough idea of some important concepts in the SDK. Starting from the top we have the identifier component that provides an authorisation ticket to the account component, which in turn makes another ticket and passes it to some external account service. Note that this is just an example, it may not use an external service.

Reviewer: Maybe highlight the component names in here to make them easier for the user to see at a glance? Also, capitalising them will make them consistent with the components in the paragraphs that follow

```suggestion
These are only some of the relationships, but they should give you a rough idea of some important concepts in the SDK. Starting from the top, we have the `Identifier` component that provides an authorisation ticket to the `Account` component, which in turn makes another ticket and passes it to some external account service. Note that this is just an example, it may not use an external service.
```

> Then looking at the 'Storage' component, this would be the session storage. In the default implementation the (file system) data is stored here, but also the authorisation tickets and the cryptographic keys. Then the authority component can redistribute those authorisation tickets if granted by the user, which happens over a channel.

Reviewer: We can maybe the beginning of this paragraph flow a bit nicer

```suggestion
Next, we have the 'Storage' component, which can be thought of as session storage. In the default implementation the (file system) data is stored here, but also the authorisation tickets and the cryptographic keys. Then the authority component can redistribute those authorisation tickets if granted by the user, which happens over a channel.
```

> There's some other components such as DNS and "manners" which are somewhat less important, but more on those later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some other components, such as `DNS` and `Manners`, which are somewhat less important, but more on those later.
```

All of these components are grouped together in a `Program` instance, which will be your main interaction point. It's an artificial environment with the components you've chosen to use. For example, you could have a program that stores session data in memory, or one that stores it in indexedDB.

### Depot

> The 'WNFS' file system that holds the user's data consists out of [IPLD](https://ipld.io/) blocks. These blocks make up the content-adressable web, another core idea to the ODD stack. A content address gives us a fingerprint for our data, whenever the data changes, the fingerprint changes. This means that when you provide a specific content address, you will always get back the same data. This means that the storage associated with the file system is tamper-proof, setting us up with an ideal primitive for data syncing.

Reviewer: Small change so back-to-back sentences don't start identically

```suggestion
The 'WNFS' file system that holds the user's data consists of [IPLD](https://ipld.io/) blocks. These blocks make up the content-addressable web, another core idea to the ODD stack. A content address gives us a fingerprint for our data. Whenever the data changes, the fingerprint changes. This means that when you provide a specific content address, you will always get back the same data. This in turn means the storage associated with the file system is tamper-proof, setting us up with an ideal primitive for data syncing.
```

> This component is reponsible for retrieving and storing these IPLD blocks. On the lowest level this means for any given bytes (data) give me back a CID (content address). And vice versa, when I present a CID, give me back the bytes for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This component is responsible for retrieving and storing these IPLD blocks. On the lowest level, this means for any given bytes (data) give me back a CID (content address). And vice versa, when I present a CID, give me back the bytes for it.
```

> Looking at this from a higher viewpoint, this unlocks the larger part of data syncing, we can transfer our blocks to a remote source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From a high level, this unlocks the larger part of data syncing: the ability to transfer our blocks to a remote source.
```

Learn more about [content addressing](https://dweb-primer.ipfs.io/avenues-for-access/power-of-content-addressing).

### Account

> Most of the time to push the data to a remote endpoint you will need some sort of account system, otherwise anyone could fill up the external storage space which costs money. The user accounts will be represented through authorisation, UCANs, our authorisation tickets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually to push the data to a remote endpoint, you will need some sort of account system, otherwise anyone could fill up the external storage space which costs money. The user accounts will be represented through authorisation, UCANs, our authorisation tickets.
```

This ODD SDK program has a UCAN store, a repository of "authorisation tickets" collected from various sources. The account system is one of those sources. It can also access that UCAN store and then use it to authorise various actions.

> This may also tie into the other part of data syncing, taking the file system's root CID (aka. data root) and storing it somewhere the other devices can reach it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may also tie into the other part of data syncing: taking the file system's root CID (aka. data root) and storing it somewhere the other devices can reach it.
```

### Identifier & Agent

> The account system also involves the identifier and agent components. The identifier signifies one of the user's identifiers and the agent delegates to external services. Both of these use decentralised identifiers ([DID](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/)s). These DIDs could, for example be derived from a passkey, a blockchain wallet or a `CryptoKeyPair` from the Web Crypto API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The account system also involves the `Identifier` and `Agent` components. The `Identifier` signifies one of the user's identifiers and the `Agent` delegates to external services. Both of these use decentralised identifiers ([DID](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/)s). These DIDs could, for example, be derived from a passkey, a blockchain wallet or a `CryptoKeyPair` from the Web Crypto API.
```

> The reason we have two components here is so that the identifier doesn't need to sign every time. This is useful for example with passkeys or blockchain wallets where you would get a popup each time you'd need to sign something.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason we have two components here is so the `Identifier` doesn't need to sign every time. This is useful, for example, with passkeys or blockchain wallets where you would get a popup each time you'd need to sign something.
```

> Typically the agent will use a temporary session key pair and the identifier is the more permanent identifier. Example flow: Identifier delegates to agent, agent contacts remote account service, account service issues UCANs addressed to identifier. Those UCANs are then used throughout the SDK to check for capabilities, etc.

Reviewer: Small tweaks to make component names consistent with previous paragraphs

```suggestion
Typically the `Agent` will use a temporary session key pair and the `Identifier` is the more permanent identifier. Example flow: Identifier delegates to agent, agent contacts remote account service, account service issues UCANs addressed to identifier. Those UCANs are then used throughout the SDK to check for capabilities, etc.
```

### Authority

> This component is reponsible for providing and requesting authority. Which technically means providing and requesting UCANs and file system secrets (access keys).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This component is responsible for providing and requesting authority, which technically means providing and requesting UCANs and file system secrets (access keys).
```

### Channel

> Channels are used for authority exchange and to communicate file system changes to a user's other devices. This component is used to create a channel. It serves as the public channel for the [AWAKE protocol](https://github.com/ucan-wg/awake) which bootstraps a secure session. Using this protocol we can establish point-to-point communication which is fully secure and encrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Channels are used for authority exchange and to communicate file system changes to a user's other devices. This component is used to create a channel. It serves as the public channel for the [AWAKE protocol](https://github.com/ucan-wg/awake), which bootstraps a secure session. Using this protocol we can establish point-to-point communication that is fully secure and encrypted.
```

# ODD

## Introduction

> ODD stands for Open Distributed Data. We want our data accessible from anywhere and distributed, meaning that it can live partially or fully in multiple places. The ODD SDK does this through the [WNFS protocol](https://github.com/wnfs-wg).

Reviewer 2: expand a little bit: "The ODD SDK is a toolkit, currently implemented in Typescript, that helps developers build systems that store data in a secure, reliable, and decentralized way. The approach ODD uses relies on open protocols, including WNFS and UCAN"

/ or something like that, just a bit more context

> Ideally as much as possible of this data lives on the devices of the owner of the data and communication of this data would be done in a decentralised peer-to-peer fashion. The ODD stack uses [UCAN](https://github.com/ucan-wg) to provide devices and users with the necessary authorisation. All of this should be usable offline.

Reviewer 2: Move the UCAN reference up one paragraph, and reduce technical details up-front, to emphasize the properties ("what") of the system, rather than the method ("how")?

In summary, the ODD stack opts for a local-first approach. The user owns their data, is stored as closely to them as possible while still opting for convenience, applications cannot access data without permission and everything is usable without an internet connection.

## Implementation

ts-odd is written in Typescript, a Javascript dialect. The resulting code should be usable in any modern Javascript environment that supports the [Web Crypto API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Crypto_API) and [Web Assembly](https://webassembly.org/). It uses the Rust implementations of [WNFS](https://github.com/wnfs-wg/rs-wnfs) and [UCAN](https://github.com/ucan-wg/rs-ucan) which compile to Web Assembly.

Various other pieces are layered on top of these core protocols and assumptions, these are called "components" in ts-odd. They allow us to adapt to various technologies and environments. We'll start with the components that are closest to the data and go from there.

### Depot

> The 'WNFS' file system that holds our user's data consists out of [IPLD](https://ipld.io/) blocks. These blocks make up the content-adressable web, another core idea to the ODD stack, making our data tamper-proof.

Reviewer 2: delete "our"; "The 'WNFS' file system that holds users' data ..." keeps it from sounding fission-specific

This component is reponsible for retrieving and storing these blocks. On the lowest level this means for any given bytes (data) give me back a CID (content address). And vice versa, when I present a CID, give me back the bytes for it.

> Looking at this from a higher viewpoint, this unlocks the larger part of data syncing, we can transfer our blocks to a remote source.

Reviewer 2: This part could use a little expansion – I don't know that we need to explain content addressing here, but maybe some context up-front to talk about the fact that we use content addressing as a way to sync data without requiring a server (possibly some links to IPFS intros on the subject?)

### Account

Most of the time to push the data to a remote endpoint you will need some sort of account system, otherwise anyone could fill up the external storage space which costs money. The user accounts will be represented through authorisation, UCANs, our authorisation tickets.

> In order to use ts-odd you'll be creating a `Program`, this is a specific setup of components, an artificial environment if you will. This program has a UCAN store, a repository of "authorisation tickets" collected from various sources. The account system is one of those sources. It can also access that UCAN store and then use it to authorise various actions.

Reviewer 2: The program concept might be extracted to a separate section above, as a way of introducing the different components?

This may also tie into the other part of data syncing, taking the file system's root CID (aka. data root) and storing it somewhere the other devices can reach it.

### Identifier & Agent

> The account system also involves the identifier and agent components. The identifier signifies one of the user's identifiers and the agent delegates to external services. Both of these use decentralised identifiers ([DID](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/)s).

Reviewer 2: examples here would be useful!

> Typically the agent will use a temporary session key pair and the identifier is the more permanent identifier. Example flow: Identifier delegates to agent, agent contacts remote account service, account service issues UCANs addressed to identifier. Those UCANs are then used throughout the SDK to check for capabilities, etc.

Reviewer 2: worth spelling out the identifier = passkey or email etc, agent = browser instance hierarchy.

Author: Isn't that what the first sentence is saying? I should also say that this is all configurable, so that may not necessarily be the case. But ideally agent = temp key pair, and identifier = permanent or as close as possible

> The reason we have two components here is so that the identifier doesn't need to sign every time. This is useful for example with passkeys or blockchain wallets where you would get a popup each time you'd need to sign something.

Reviewer 2: move up to before delegation explanation

### Authority

This component is reponsible for providing and requesting authority. Which technically means providing and requesting UCANs and file system secrets (access keys).

### Channel

> The channel component is used to establish a channel. It serves as the public channel for the [AWAKE protocol](https://github.com/ucan-wg/awake). You can use whatever channel here as the AWAKE protocol used on top is responsible for establish a secure session. Typically this will be websockets or a P2P channel.

Reviewer 2: Explain AWAKE briefly; below there's a very brief explanation, but expand and put the use-case before the description of the mechanism
